INTRODUCTION oF

watched from a control room, the monk began the meditation proto-
col the researchers had designed—alternating between one minute of
meditating on compassion and a thirty-second rest period. He quickly
cycled through this pattern four times in a row, cued by a translator. The
researchers watched in awe; at almost the exact moment the monk began
his meditation, the EEG registered a sudden and massive spike in activ-
ity. The scientists assumed that with such a large, quick bump, the monk
must have changed positions or otherwise moved, yet to the observing
eye, he remained perfectly still.

What was remarkable was not just the consistency of the monk's
brain activity—turning “off” and “on” repeatedly from activity to rest
period—but also the fact that he needed no “warm-up” period. If youre
a meditator, or have at least tried to calm your brain, you know that typi-
cally it takes some time to quiet the parade of distracting thoughts that
marches through your mind. Rinpoche seemed to need no such transition
period. Indeed, he seemed to be able to come in and out of a powerful
meditative state as easily as flipping a switch. More than ten years after
these initial studies, scans of the forty-one-year-old monk's brain showed

fewer signs of aging than his peers’. The researchers said he had the brain

©

of someone ten years younger.
Researchers who scanned Buddhist monk Matthieu Ricard’s then

subsequently labeled him “the World's Happiest Man’ after they found

the highest level of gamma waves—those associated with attention, mem-
ory, learning, and happiness—ever recorded by science. One monk who's off
the charts may seem like an anomaly, but Ricard isn't alone. Twenty-one
other monks who had their brains scanned during a variety of meditation

practices also showed gamma wave levels that spiked higher and lasted

longer (even during sleep) than non-meditators.

Why should we think like monks? If you wanted to know how to domi-
nate the basketball court, you might turn to Michael Jordan; if you
wanted to innovate, you might investigate Elon Musk; you might study

Beyoncé to learn how to perform. If you want to train your mind to
